IT was one of those unusually mild days that sometimes come to the lower Susquehanna in late March. Outside, the sun shone. A song sparrow sang. The low grass in the orchard already looked green. Two maples in blossom stood red against the distant dark mountain. You could smell the good, upturned earth where Neal and a hired man were ploughing, with chickens and a robin following the furrows. But inside the big upstairs bedroom, Myra Butler had her windows closed and the curtains drawn. She lay on her couch in the welcome dimness with her eyes half closed. She was thinking, as she had so much, of that day in July eleven years ago. It was harvest time and Harry was helping the cradlers. He had taken little Johnny along. They were cutting wheat in the farthest field that curved like a wide snaith into the timber surrounding it on three sides. This timber and most of the other woods that used to stand between here and the Susquehanna was gone now, cut down and destroyed in the Indian wars. But then it stood thick and heavy as it had when the first settler came. A hundred times she had heard the story and a hundred times had she told it, how the savages had hid in the woods and watched the cradlers. How long they had been there no one knew, but with devilish cunning they waited till the harvesters were in the middle of the field far from their rifles stacked along the fence. Then they opened fire. Tom Galaugher was killed, and Mary Awl, who helped in the binding, was wounded. The other harvesters made their escape, all but little Johnny who had been left in the shade of a big hickory building a playhouse with shagbark. When the men came back with help and fresh arms, the boy was gone. They had kept the news from his mother as long as they could, but in the end they had to tell her that the savages had her child. That was when Myra Butler had first taken to her bed. Lying here this March morning with her eyes half closed, she thought she heard someone ride up to the house. Afterward there was the sound of feet on the stairs, a knock, and Kate's vigorous red face peered around the edge of the door. "Parson Elder's come!" she said and came in. Swiftly she redded the room, drew back the curtains, combed her sister-in-law's hair and helped her into another gown. Afterward a lean gray-haired man in black smallclothes, stockings, and slippers with fine silver buckles entered. He was much beloved in the two townships. His keen face seldom lost its gravity, and it didn't lose a shred of it now as he quietly crossed the room and pressed the invalid woman's hand. "I saw Harry at the mill yesterday. He said you were poorly." "It's nothing unusual, Parson," Myra Butler said. "But I'm always glad when you come." "It's unusual enough, Parson!" Kate corrected bluntly. Parson Elder glanced at one face, then the other. He was a leading citizen of the county, long pastor of the Derry church, a colonel in the militia, a shrewd and successful farmer, and not easily affected by complaints and circumstances. Now he pulled a chair to the side of the couch and seated himself much as Dr. Childsley might have done. "Tell me about it." "There is nothing to tell," Myra Butler said. "As you know, I haven't been a well woman for more than eleven years." "But she's worse lately," Kate put in. "And I'll tell you why, Parson. It's Johnny. You remember how often you prayed with her in this room that the Lord would restore him to her. Your prayers were righteous and the Lord answered them. Now you must do something about it, because you're the one responsible for getting him back." The parson didn't look at Kate, only at Mrs. Butler. "What's he done now?" he asked quietly. The mother's lips closed tight, but Kate was quick to go on. "You know how he tried to run off and take little Gordie along? It's lucky Harry and Wilse found him before he got away. Well, that's only a small part of it. He's a trial to all of us but Gordie. He's ungrateful. He won't own to his white skin. He still thinks he's Indian. He says Indians don't have regular meal hours so he doesn't want to come to meals except when he's hungry. He shames us in front of the relations and neighbors. He won't join in our talk. He says we only know uninteresting things. He means we don't talk of savage things like beaver and panthers and bears and skins and scalps like the Indians. He believes Indians are sinless and perfect. He even believes it's right to lie and steal." "I'm sure that's untrue!" Myra Butler declared quickly. "Well, if it's untrue, then things here walk off by themselves," her sister-in-law answered tartly. "First it was one of your butcher knives. Then Harry's rifle went. Fortunately it wasn't his best. The brass part to the patch box is broken and Harry said he never liked it too much anyway because curly maple rusts the barrel. But it shoots to kill, and Harry says some powder and lead are gone, too. I've missed Indian meal. In fact, twice the bin was lower than I remembered." "But you don't know definitely if anything was taken!" Myra Butler insisted. "Not a hundred per cent. I only know somebody around here who doesn't like us. It don't matter about me but it galls me to see him treat his own mother and father like strangers. The Bible says, 'Honor thy father and mother that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.' But he only honors his false Indian father and mother and that's what's the matter with Myra." "Kate-" "It's true, Myra, and you know it. You've heard him talk almost every chance he gets of this Cuyloga and Queen Haga or whatever her name is. He may live in this house, but he's still a savage through and through. If he wasn't the image of his Grandfather Espy, I'd swear Colonel Bouquet made a mistake and sent us the offshoot of some squaw and no-account trader." Myra Butler winced. The Reverend Elder saw it and sat back in his chair. He could afford to take his time and deliberate. It was a difficult subject. "Perhaps I can talk to the boy for you," he said. "I was hoping you would. I'll get Johnny for you," Kate told him and left the room. Neither the parson nor Mrs. Butler heard the boy come in. One minute the two were talking together, and the next he stood inside the doorway, a lithe, dark-faced figure. In his jacket, pants and boots he might have been one of several well-to-do boys in the township. But on second glance there was something different in the way he held himself, an erectness, an intensity, an alien unmanageable quality you could not lay your finger on. Most boys brought in front of the formidable Parson Elder were reluctant, some terrified, all uneasy. This boy stood before him without fear or inferiority. Only his eyes showed traces of unhappiness and concealed hostility. Before any of them could speak, Aunt Kate came brushing through with pitcher and glasses on a brass tray. "You don't need to stand, Johnny," she told him. He dropped down to sit on the floor, and the clergyman noted the instant passage of pain across his mother's face. "There's a chair here by me, Johnny," he invited. "I am used to sit on the floor," he answered. "Always I sit on the ground outside. It is the lap of my mother, the Earth." Aunt Kate flashed a look at the parson. "You see!" it said. The sweetish perfume of whiskey penetrated the room as she poured the glasses. It was the custom of the times, a full one to the clergyman, slightly lesser ones to her sister-in-law and self, and one mixed with water to Gordie who had followed her upstairs. Now she held up the fifth glass already partly prepared with water. "Johnny?" she asked but you could see she didn't expect him to take any. The parson observed his refusal quietly. "It would be more dutiful if you would join us, Johnny," he said. "Your aunt invited you and it's well to be obedient and of the same mind." The boy's dark eyes met the minister's. "I don't like," he said briefly. "I'm not sure that all of us particularly like everything we do on earth," the Reverend Elder commented slowly. "However, there's such a thing among civilized people as putting off things of the flesh and showing charity and things of the spirit, especially in the home. If you practiced politeness and took a dram with us, you might feel more friendly towards God and man." "My father told me why white people give rum to the Indian," the boy answered. "Get Indian drunk. Buy his furs cheap. Afterward Indian gets sober. Has no money, no furs, no nothing. Hates white people. Kills them some day. Now Aunt Kate gives rum to Gordie. You want give rum to me. You want make us hate you? You want make us kill you some day?" Aunt Kate turned on him angrily. "Now that's enough, Johnny," she threatened. "I'll talk to him, Mrs. Stewart," the parson said. He turned to the boy. "John, what you say about some white traders is probably true. I've never seen it but I've heard of it and don't condone it. There are evil whites like everything else. But this fellowship between us isn't evil. It's just sociable. We are friends here together. We don't want to get anything out of you." The boy's eyes showed disbelief. "You want me your friend, you say. Maybe you want me to do like you. Want me baptize or pray to your God or believe things I be sorry for afterward." There was an awkward silence. The parson flushed. "I do want you to believe certain things that are good for your soul," he admitted. "Things that nearly all your white race believe in and practice. And I do want you to do some of the things I say. For instance, to treat your mother with kindness. Also not to lie, steal or swear." "Indian only swear like he learns from the white man," the boy said. "My father says when he is a boy he hears white man say God damn. God damn when it rain and God damn if powder don't go off. So my father says God damn too. Then somebody tells him what God damn mean-that the Great Spirit must burn it in hell fire forever. He is surprise. How could the Great Spirit bother to burn in hell fire forever powder that don't go off? For why would he burn rain when he made rain and sent it on earth? After that my father don't swear. He tells me never swear. It's the white man's lie." "Well, I'm glad to hear such precepts from a pagan," the Reverend Elder said with dignity and just a little sarcasm. "Did he also instruct you to treat your mother and father with love and obedience?" "Always I treat my father and mother with love and obedience." "He means his Indian father and mother," Aunt Kate explained. "He won't believe that his Indian father ever did anything bad and horrible like scalping white children and dashing their poor brains out against a tree." "Is not true!" the boy cried, getting to his feet swiftly. "But is true that white Peshtank men killed Conestogo children, and Colonel Elder is captain of Peshtank men." The shape of sarcasm rounding and modeling Parson Elder's mouth slowly disintegrated. His face showed pain. "No one knows better than a preacher of the gospel the dark unfathomable heart of man," he said sadly. "Sometimes even the most exemplary Christians get out of hand." "Does good man like preacher get out of hand, too?" the boy asked. The parson gazed at him steadily. "No, not often," he said. "I did what I could. As their military leader, I ordered them to disperse and go home. But they refused. Had I persisted, they would have killed my favorite horse." "Better your favorite horse dead than the favorite young ones of the poor Indian," the boy asserted. The Reverend Elder sat more powerful and self-restrained than Myra Butler had ever seen him. "It's not only the white man who breaks the sixth commandment, Johnny," he said humbly. "Evil and ugly things have been committed against the will of God on both sides. Eight and nine years ago I never dared preach without a pair of loaded rifles in the pulpit. The men in my congregation kept their rifles standing by their pews. It was to discourage any of your red friends peeping in the window from trying to scalp us and our children. You say your foster Indian father never harmed a white child. It may be true. But I'm sorry to tell you that I know personally the authentic cases of many white children who were killed and mutilated by Indians. In one case the head was used as a football." "Is not true!" the boy cried. "I see many scalp but no children scalp in our village. My father says men are cowards who fight children." Aunt Kate had stepped up quickly to stop the boy, but the parson deterred her. His face was white. Despite that, he lifted his glass to his lips with great self-control. Sipping the whiskey coolly from time to time, he talked with strong earnestness to the boy of the brotherhood of man and the duties of Christians, red and white, to each other. He asked no questions that required answer, made no provocative statements and brooked no interruption. He closed with a long fervent prayer and then dismissed the boy. When the latter was gone, the veteran parson wearily asked if he could have another glass. "Living here near the frontier, we have our own particular trials and tribulations," he said. "This case of Johnny is not an easy one. But I don't think we should be too discouraged. It seems fairly natural under the circumstances for the boy to act this way. He's been in the hands of heathen for more than ten years. He's been virtually raised by them. Their character and philosophy was above the average savage, I'm glad to say, and you can be thankful for that. Just the same they were not white people, certainly not Christians, and you'll have to bear with their influence for a while. Ten years' teaching takes a long time to break down. You know what Proverbs says, 'Train up a child in the way he should go and when he is old he will not depart from it.' John has been brought up in the way he was not intended by his Maker to go, and it will take some effort to make him depart from it. But time is on our side." "What can we do, Parson?" Myra Butler asked piteously. "Just what you have been doing. Be grateful that God has given Johnny back while he's still a youth with a pliable mind. Teach him daily. Don't get discouraged. You see him every day and don't notice his improvement. But I see him only on the Sabbath or once in a while when I come here, and I can see a great change in him already. Despite himself, his English is better. Already he walks and gestures less like an Indian. You can't expect him to turn into a seraph or saint overnight. Don't push him too hard. Guide him little by little. Spring is here and soon he'll be working in the fields, getting up an appetite for the table. One of these days he'll notice some pretty and desirable girl. Pray God he takes a fancy to her. Then it won't be long till he's settled in our white way of life." HARRY BUTLER stood just inside the door. This was his son's room. It seemed curious that he hadn't been here since Johnny was back and probably wouldn't be now save for the boy's sickness. What that sickness was none of them exactly knew. Dr. Childsley had been here twice, the last time this very day when he had bled the boy's feet into a wicked-looking gallipot from his saddlebags. But he wouldn't diagnose the trouble. The brusque Lancaster County doctor only looked grim, and muttered as he did the other time that the boy had lived too many years among the Indians, subject to their uncivilized fare, hardship and mode of life. Indians were liable to mysterious forest miasmas, he said, and at times they died like pigeons. Despite all curative knowledge, white physicians didn't know very much about these savage ailments. Cut them up, and the heathen had the same organs and muscles as civilized peoples, even to the exact shape and size of their bones. The blood they hemorrhaged was as rich and red as any white man's, but there were obscure primitive tendencies and susceptibilities in the aboriginal race, and they weren't helped by the superstition lurking in the dark and hidden recesses of the untutored mind. All he knew definitely was that the boy had some unknown fever, probably a result of his long unhappy captivity. This fever had remained unchanged now for nearly a week. It had refused to yield to powerful teas and powders. Sooner or later it would reach a crisis, and send the boy either into slow recovery or the grave. The latter statement had shaken Harry Butler. He wished he could do something. The boy had been the victim of unhappy chance. If he hadn't taken him that day eleven years ago to play at the side of the wheat field, the Indians would never have got their heathen hands on him. Today he would be a different being, brought up on Christian precepts and the nourishing food and drink suitable to his race. He wished he could talk to the boy, expressing these thoughts. It might release the burden long on his breast. Of course, he himself had really not been guilty, only the unwitting means that evil had used. Just the same if he bared his heart, it would relieve him and Johnny might bare his in return, expressing filial regret for his persistent and unhealthy passion for Indian ways and for his stubborn antagonism toward the decent thrifty ways of his white people. He might even confess his part in the disappearance of the curly maple rifle and ask forgiveness. In that event Harry Butler would completely pardon him and tell him that he meant to make him a present of it anyhow. But for all the eager anxiety in the father's mind, the boy remained deaf to him, lying flat in bed without benefit of a bolster, the dark eyes in his flushed face gazing straight up at the ceiling. When his father spoke to him, he gave no sign except eventually to answer. But there was little warmth or affection in it, only a kind of brief and mechanical response. The older man might as well have been a stranger with no right to invade the boy's solitude and privacy. It was curious how at such a time in the shadow of death all the belongings of the helpless victim affected a father to a degree he dared not speak of even to his wife. There from a row of wooden pins on the wall hung the still and mute clothing Johnny had worn in the sunlight of health-the weekday coat and pants made over from a suit the Reading tailor had cut for the father when he was still a young man-the boy's Sabbath clothes in which he attended divine service and listened to the word of God-also the miserable and pitiful Indian dress in which he had come home from captivity. Since the boy's illness, Aunt Kate had hurried to take it out of hiding and put it back, hoping it might console him and her own conscience as well. In the end, the father left the bedside saddened and unrelieved. Going to a small room downstairs which had once been used as a cloak room but was now his office-room, he stood at the high desk and opened his heavy leather-bound account book. Hardly had he begun to set down the day's entries when he heard someone ride up to the house. There was a knock and Kate called him. When he got to the hall he found Parson Elder's son standing there in restrained excitement. He waited till Aunt Kate had gone. "My father sent me over. There's Indians around and he wanted to warn you." At once Mr. Butler took the younger man to his office-room and closed the door. Here he turned around, shocked. "Indians! Why, we're at peace!" "Maybe we are but they aren't," the other said. "One was shot tonight at Mehargue's pasture. He's lying down there now. Since Papa's head of the militia, Mr. Mehargue came right over." "Any of our people attacked?" "We don't know yet. They've seen only two of the savages so far. They stopped first down at the mill asking for the white boy that was taken from the Indians. The men at the mill sent them to Mr. Owens' cooper shop. At least, that's where the Indians went. My father thinks the men at the mill told them Mr. Owens was Johnny's uncle and that the Indians couldn't understand English very well and thought that Johnny lived there. But some think the men at the mill did it on purpose, for devilment. They know how much your brother-in-law hates Indians. But evidently Mr. Owens was very kind and hospitable. When one of the Indians asked for 'lum,' Mr. Owens gave him some. I believe the Indian had two or three mugs. Then he started boasting about himself and abusing the whites. There were some cronies with Mr. Owens and they said the Indian told degrading stories on the white people. Anyhow about sundown the two Indians left. It was just getting dark when the Mehargues heard two shots. Some others heard them, too. When the Mehargues investigated, they found the Indian lying dead and scalped in their pasture. Mr. Mehargue said it looked like somebody had ambushed him from behind the trees because the Indian had been shot from the side and back. My father said he'd have him buried in the morning." Harry Butler heard all this with a mixture of emotion. Troubles seldom came singly. Never had he known it to fail. "Did your father say who he believed shot him?" "He didn't say, sir." The younger man moved uneasily and declined to meet Mr. Butler's eyes. "Did he say what happened to the other Indian?" "Nobody's seen him since. If there were only two, my father thinks he's back across the river by this time and still going. But you never know how many might be hiding in the mountain. My father thought you ought to hear right away. He said you'd likely want to keep it from Johnny. It might aggravate his sickness." For a while after the rider had gone, Harry Butler stood thinking. If he told Kate, she would invariably tell Myra and that would upset her. Let her hover around for news. He would confide in no one for the present but keep his guns handy and loaded. When he heard Gordie trotting downstairs from his mother's room, he went back to his office. It was a relief at such a time to stand at his desk and straighten out his business affairs, to reckon up his accounts and property. When he opened the heavy brown-leathered book, the double pages with their solid lines of physical and financial items looked back at him, stable and reassuring. Presently the rough nib of his quill scratched roughly over the smooth blue and red lined surface of the thick page. May 31, 1765 Opened last Kag of Cydar. Very Potent Sow Campbell sold me has Litter of 11 He wished there might be more things to set down. Dealing with valid material things seldom failed to calm him. For a while he occupied himself counting the paper pound notes and silver shillings. The considerable sum steadied him. A pity his eldest son hadn't been raised to evaluate and enjoy the satisfaction and benefits of honest work, the solace and support of ready cash, and the remuneration and accumulation of active property.